BinaryFormatter Migration Guide (#41564)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/serialization/binaryformatter-migration-guide/winforms-migration-guide.md

---
title: "BinaryFormatter Migration Guide: WinForms Migration Guide"
description: "This guide covers the affects the deprecation and removal of BinaryFormatter from .NET has on WinForms and recommends migration steps."
ms.date: 7/31/2024
no-loc: [BinaryFormatter, WinForms]
helpviewer_keywords:
  - "BinaryFormatter"
  - "WinForms"
---
# WinForms Migration Guide

# BinaryFormatter Removal

> Starting in .NET 9, BinaryFormatter is being moved to a separate, unsupported nuget package due to its known [security risks](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/binaryformatter-security-guide). For more information about the risks BinaryFormatter poses and our decision on its removal, see [BinaryFormatter Migration Guide](./overview.md). With BinaryFormatter’s removal, it is expected that many WinForms applications will be impacted, and action will need to be taken to complete migration to .NET 9+.

Reviewer: Good point! I'll make those updates.

# How BinaryFormatter Affects WinForms

WinForms itself has and still currently contains BinaryFormatter code internally for scenarios such as clipboard, drag/drop, and designer ResX, however, measures have been taken to mitigate the usage of BinaryFormatter behind the scenes for common primitive types, including primitive arrays and primitive lists. Usage of these types in clipboard and drag/drop scenarios will continue to work without using BinaryFormatter and without any gesture from the developer. Primitive types include the following

- `boolean`
- `byte`
- `char`
- `decimal`
- `double`
- `int`
- `sbyte`
- `single`
- `TimeSpan`
- `DateTime`
- `uint`
- `string`
- `nint`
- `nuint`

Additional types WinForms currently supports include the following

> - `PointF`

Reviewer: Yes, my understanding is that we cannot introduce TypeConverters for compatibility reasons.

> - `PointF`

Reviewer 2: We can introduce reader/writer that could be used in the clipboard , as least we could using the BFO, I assume we can do the same using the NRFB...
see src/System.Private.Windows.Core/src/System/Private/Windows/Core/BinaryFormat/BinaryFormattedObjectExtensions.cs , method TryGetDrawingPrimitivesObject in my PR - https://github.com/dotnet/winforms/pull/11545/files#diff-4c1c7f716bfa6459b4ed3cb84f234bc21ba419b9e5e5a9a9407052fd28fa097b

- `RectangleF`
- `Bitmap`
- `ImageListStreamer`

## Clipboard

If your clipboard scenario does not involve the types above, BinaryFormatter would be used when [`Clipboard.SetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdata) is called with your type and when [`Clipboard.GetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.getdata) is called to get your type. BinaryFormatter will also be used if [`Clipboard.SetDataObject(object, copy: true)`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdataobject#system-windows-clipboard-setdataobject(system-object-system-boolean)) is called. With the BinaryFormatter removal, developers will now see a string about BinaryFormatter being removed on the clipboard when using those APIs with unsupported types.

> 

Reviewer 3: Out of curiousity: The most frequent application is to put BitMaps/Images/SVG data and Rich-Text-Formatted data into the clipboard. Are those scenarios broken now?

Reviewer: Bitmaps should still work as expected. I am not so familiar with the other formats, but if they do not go into the clipboard as the types outlined as supported then users will need to convert the data into one of those supported types before handing to clipboard

Reviewer 2: Image is the same as Bitmap.... MetaDataFiles had never been supported.... CSV - if placed onto clipboard using the appropriate OLE format, it will work the same as in NETFX because it does not go through the binary formatter :)

If your drag/drop scenario involves unsupported types, BinaryFormatter would be used when [`Control.DoDragDrop`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.control.dodragdrop) is called, and the item is dragged out of process and when DataObject.GetData is called to retrieve your type that has been dragged out of process. With the BinaryFormatter removal, developers will now see a string about BinaryFormatter being removed upon dropping the dragged item in another process when a drag operation starts with unsupported types.

## The WinForms Designer

The WinForms designer also uses BinaryFormatter internally for ResX serialization/deserialization and CodeDom.

Types and properties may be participating in serialization without developers realizing due to the standard behavior of the WinForms designer. One way that BinaryFormatter is used where developers may not be aware of is when a property on a UserControl is introduced and that control is already populated at design-time, then it’s very likely that that data gets serialized into code or resource files. If all the following are true:

- A property contains data at the time when a Form in the Designer gets saved

> - that property is not attributed with `DesignerSerializationVisibility(false)`

Reviewer 3: Missing:

- the property is not read-only.

- that property does not have a DefaultValueAttribute

> - that property does not have a respective bool ShouldSerialize\[PropertyName\] method returning false

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- that property does not have a respective `bool ShouldSerialize\[PropertyName\]` method returning `false` at the time of the CodeDOM serialization process. (Note: the method can be of `private` scope.)
```

the Designer looks if that property’s type has a type converter. If it does then it uses it to serialize the property content, otherwise BinaryFormatter is used to serialize the content into the resource file.
WinForms has added analyzers along with code fixes to help bring awareness to this type of behavior where BinaryFormatter serialization may be occurring without the developer’s knowledge.

# Migrating Away from BinaryFormatter

If unsupported types are used in the affected scenarios, action will need to be taken to complete migration to .NET 9+.

## Clipboard and Drag/Drop

> For unsupported types that are used in clipboard and drag/drop operations, it is recommended developers format those types as a byte[] or string payload before passing the data to clipboard or drag/drop APIs. Using JSON is one way to achieve this. Note that adjustments will need to be made to handle receiving a JSON formatted type just as adjustments have been made to place JSON formatted types on clipboard or drag/drop operations. For more information on how to serialize/deserialize the type with JSON, see [How to write .NET objects as JSON (serialize)](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json/how-to)

Reviewer 3: Idea: We could introduce extension methods maybe for converting BitMaps or other formats to JSon and back? Maybe that could be also something for the CommunityPack, so we can deliver those things out of band?

Reviewer: We handle Bitmaps already without BinaryFormatter. Plan in .NET 10 is to introduce methods that will take care of converting to items to/from JSON. For .NET 9, this will need to be done by developer.

# How BinaryFormatter Affects WinForms

WinForms itself has and still currently contains `BinaryFormatter` code internally for scenarios such as clipboard, drag/drop, and Designer ResX, however, measures have been taken to mitigate the usage of `BinaryFormatter` behind the scenes for common primitive types, including primitive arrays and primitive lists. Usage of these types in clipboard and drag/drop scenarios will continue to work without using `BinaryFormatter` and without any gesture from the developer. Primitive types include the following

- `boolean`
- `byte`
- `char`
- `decimal`
- `double`
- `int`
- `sbyte`
- `single`
- `TimeSpan`
- `DateTime`
- `uint`
- `string`
- `nint`
- `nuint`

Additional types WinForms currently supports include the following

- `PointF`
- `RectangleF`
- `Bitmap`
- `ImageListStreamer`

## Clipboard

> If your clipboard scenario does not involve the types above, `BinaryFormatter` would be used when [`Clipboard.SetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdata) is called with your type and when [`Clipboard.GetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.getdata) is called to get your type. `BinaryFormatter` will also be used if [`Clipboard.SetDataObject(object, copy: true)`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdataobject#system-windows-clipboard-setdataobject(system-object-system-boolean)) is called. With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, developers will now see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed on the clipboard when using those APIs with types that are not intrinsically handled during serialization/deserialization.

Reviewer 2: These are WPF link, is this intentional?

Reviewer 2: >With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, developers will now see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed on the clipboard when using those APIs with types that are not intrinsically handled during serialization/deserialization.

I think this is not clear enough. It does not say that devs will see this exception when they try to get that data, not when using SetDataObject API.

Reviewer: Oops, it isn't intentional :) but this section may be moved out since it a lot of this information is likely the same for WPF. I'll be more specific about when exception will be seen.

> If your clipboard scenario does not involve the types above, `BinaryFormatter` would be used when [`Clipboard.SetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdata) is called with your type and when [`Clipboard.GetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.getdata) is called to get your type. `BinaryFormatter` will also be used if [`Clipboard.SetDataObject(object, copy: true)`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.clipboard.setdataobject#system-windows-clipboard-setdataobject(system-object-system-boolean)) is called. With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, developers will now see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed on the clipboard when using those APIs with types that are not intrinsically handled during serialization/deserialization.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention something about FORMAT values? This section applies to formats that go through BF only, standard OLE formats don't. see cipboardtests.cs in main  - the top of the file has lists that separated formats into safe and unsafe

Reviewer: Really good point, thanks!

## Drag/Drop

If your drag/drop scenario involves types that are not intrinsically handled during serialization/deserialization, `BinaryFormatter` would be used when [`Control.DoDragDrop`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.control.dodragdrop) is called, and the item is dragged out of process and when [`DataObject.GetData`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.windows.dataobject.getdata) is called to retrieve your type that has been dragged out of process. With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, developers will now see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed upon dropping the dragged item in another process when a drag operation starts with types that are not intrinsically handled.

## The WinForms Designer

The WinForms Designer also uses `BinaryFormatter` internally for ResX serialization/deserialization and CodeDom.

> Types and properties may be participating in serialization without developers realizing due to the standard behavior of the WinForms Designer. One way that `BinaryFormatter` is used where developers may not be aware of is when a property on a UserControl is introduced and that control is already populated at design-time, then it’s very likely that that data gets serialized into code or resource files. If all the following are true:

Reviewer 2: When are we binary serializing into  code? Sure, custom DesignerSerializer could do whatever they want, but I don't think we ever do it

## How BinaryFormatter Affects WinForms

WinForms itself has and still currently contains `BinaryFormatter` code internally for scenarios such as clipboard, drag/drop, and storing or loading resources at design time, however, measures have been taken to mitigate the usage of `BinaryFormatter` behind the scenes for common primitive types, including primitive collections. Usage of these types in clipboard and drag/drop scenarios will continue to work without using `BinaryFormatter` and without any gesture from the developer. Primitive types include the following

- `bool`
- `byte`
- `char`
- `decimal`
- `double`
- `int`
- `sbyte`
- `float`
- `TimeSpan`
- `DateTime`
- `uint`
- `string`
- `nint`
- `nuint`
- `long`
- `ulong`

Additional types WinForms currently supports include the following

- `PointF`
- `RectangleF`
- `Bitmap`
- `ImageListStreamer`

> ### Clipboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Clipboard
```
```suggestion
### Clipboard

```

- A property contains data at the time when a Form in the Designer gets saved
- that property is not attributed with `DesignerSerializationVisibility(false)`
- that property is not read-only
- that property does not have a DefaultValueAttribute
- that property does not have a respective bool `ShouldSerialize\[PropertyName\]` method returning false at the time of the CodeDOM serialization process. (Note: the method can be of `private` scope.)

the Designer looks if that property’s type has a type converter. If it does then it uses it to serialize the property content, otherwise `BinaryFormatter` is used to serialize the content into the resource file.
WinForms has added analyzers along with code fixes to help bring awareness to this type of behavior where `BinaryFormatter` serialization may be occurring without the developer’s knowledge.

## Migrating Away from BinaryFormatter

> If types that are not intrinsically handled during serialization/deserialization are used in the affected scenarios, action will need to be taken to complete migration to .NET 9+.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If types that aren't intrinsically handled during serialization and deserialization are used in the affected scenarios, you'll need to take action to complete migration to .NET 9 or a later version.
```

> ### Clipboard and Drag/Drop

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Clipboard and drag-and-drop
```

> For types that are not intrinsically handled that are used in clipboard and drag/drop operations, it is recommended developers format those types as a `byte[]` or `string` payload before passing the data to clipboard or drag/drop APIs. Using JSON is one way to achieve this. Note that adjustments will need to be made to handle receiving a JSON formatted type just as adjustments have been made to place JSON formatted types on clipboard or drag/drop operations. For more information on how to serialize/deserialize the type with JSON, see [How to write .NET objects as JSON (serialize)](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/system-text-json/how-to)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For types that aren't intrinsically handled that are used in clipboard and drag-and-drop operations, it's recommended that you format those types as a `byte[]` or `string` payload before passing the data to clipboard or drag-and-drop APIs. Using JSON is one way to achieve this. You'll need to make adjustments to handle receiving a JSON formatted type just as adjustments have been made to place JSON formatted types on clipboard or drag-and-drop operations. For more information on how to serialize and deserialize the type with JSON, see [How to write .NET objects as JSON (serialize)](../system-text-json/how-to.md).
```

---
title: "BinaryFormatter Migration Guide: WinForms Migration Guide"
description: "Learn about the effects of the deprecation and removal of BinaryFormatter from .NET on Windows Forms and how to migrate."
ms.date: 7/31/2024
no-loc: [BinaryFormatter, WinForms]
helpviewer_keywords:
  - "BinaryFormatter"
  - "WinForms"
---

# Window Forms migration guide for BinaryFormatter

## BinaryFormatter removal

> Starting in .NET 9, `BinaryFormatter` has moved to a separate, unsupported NuGet package due to its known [security risks](../binaryformatter-security-guide.md). For more information about the risks `BinaryFormatter` poses and the reason for its removal, see [BinaryFormatter migration guide](overview.md). With BinaryFormatter’s removal, it's expected that many Windows Forms applications will be impacted, and you'll need to take action to complete your migration to .NET 9 or a later version.

Reviewer 2: Should BinaryFormatter word be emphasized with tick marks everywhere in the doc?

Reviewer 5: I'm unsure if we should backtick BinaryFormatter everywhere. It seems like a distraction in most places and leaving the backticks off helps solidify that BinaryFormatter is as much a _concept_ as it is n _API_. I'm inclined to only backtick it when specifically referring to the type name, but omit the backticks when referring to the _concept_.

What do you think, @gewarren?

Reviewer 4: I tend to agree with @jeffhandley. Even without backticks, BinaryFormatter is unlikely to get localized.

## How BinaryFormatter affects Windows Forms

> Windows Forms itself has and still contains `BinaryFormatter` code internally for scenarios such as clipboard, drag-and-drop, and storing or loading resources at design time. However, measures have been taken to mitigate the usage of `BinaryFormatter` behind the scenes for common primitive types, including primitive collections. Usage of these types in clipboard and drag-and-drop scenarios will continue to work without using `BinaryFormatter` and without any gesture from the developer. Primitive types include the following:

Reviewer 2: >Primitive types include the following

`Primitive types` term is interpreted differently depending on context. I.e. these are not C# primitive types - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/builtin-types/built-in-types. 

These are NRBF `primitive types` - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.formats.nrbf.primitivetyperecord?view=net-8.0 

Consider either giving more context or calling them common types.

- `bool`
- `byte`
- `char`
- `decimal`
- `double`
- `int`
- `sbyte`
- `float`
- `TimeSpan`
- `DateTime`
- `uint`
- `string`
- `nint`
- `nuint`
- `long`
- `ulong`

Windows Forms also supports the following additional types:

- `PointF`
- `RectangleF`
- `Bitmap`
- `ImageListStreamer`

### Clipboard

> All Standard OLE [`DataFormats`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.dataformats#fields) don't go through `BinaryFormatter`, except for `DataFormats.Serializable` and any custom format. If you're using `DataFormats.Serializable` or a custom format, `BinaryFormatter` is used if your clipboard scenario involves types that aren't intrinsically handled when [`Clipboard.SetData`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.clipboard.setdata) is called with your type and when [`Clipboard.GetData`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.clipboard.getdata) is called to get your type. `BinaryFormatter` is also used if [`Clipboard.SetDataObject(object, copy: true)`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.clipboard.setdataobject) is called. With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, you won't see an exception when setting the data on the clipboard if `BinaryFormatter` was needed. Instead, you'll see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed when you attempt to get the type that isn't intrinsically handled from the clipboard.

Reviewer 2: I don't think word `Standard` should be capitalized

### Drag-and-drop feature

If your drag-and-drop scenario involves types that aren't intrinsically handled during serialization and deserialization, `BinaryFormatter` is used when [`Control.DoDragDrop`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.forms.control.dodragdrop) is called, and when [`DataObject.GetData`](/dotnet/api/system.windows.dataobject.getdata) is called to retrieve a type that's been dragged out of process. With the `BinaryFormatter` removal, you'll now see a string about `BinaryFormatter` being removed when you drop a dragged item in another process for drag-and-drop operations with types that aren't intrinsically handled.

### The Windows Forms Designer

> The Windows Forms Designer also uses `BinaryFormatter` internally for ResX serialization and deserialization, and for CodeDom.

Reviewer 2: This section is applicable to the OOP designer, and we replaced CodeDom store serialization with Json

Reviewer 2: CodeDom -> CodeDOM

> Types and properties might participate in serialization without you realizing due to the standard behavior of the Windows Forms Designer. One way that `BinaryFormatter` is used that you might not be aware of is when a property on a <xref:System.Windows.Forms.UserControl> is introduced and that control is already populated at design time. It's likely that that data gets serialized into resource files. Consider the following conditions:

Reviewer 2: 1. It does not have to be a UserControl, it's an IComponent. 

2. You are talking about a public property, not any property
3. ` is already populated at design time.` - I don't think `already` is important. You can edit this property in the PropertyBrowser too. The silent case is harder to discover

- A property contains data at the time when a Form in the Designer is saved.
- That property is not attributed with `DesignerSerializationVisibility(false)`.
- That property is not read-only.
- That property does not have a DefaultValueAttribute.

> - That property does not have a respective `bool ShouldSerialize[PropertyName]` method that returns `false` at the time of the CodeDOM serialization process. (Note: the method can have `private` scope.)

Reviewer 2: Property type does not have a DesignTime serializer - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.visualstudio.modeling.dsldefinition.designerserializer?view=visualstudiosdk-2019

Reviewer: I added another bullet, does this sound about right?

Reviewer 2: > I added another bullet, does it sound about right?

I don't see this change, did it get lost in merges?

If these statements are true, the Designer determines if that property’s type has a type converter. If it does, the Designer uses the type converter to serialize the property content. Otherwise, it uses `BinaryFormatter` to serialize the content into the resource file.

> Windows Forms has added analyzers along with code fixes to help bring awareness to this type of behavior where `BinaryFormatter` serialization might be occurring without the developer’s knowledge.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to add a screen shot with such property detected by the analyzer?

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary given the conditions outlined seem clear when this analyzer would show, but I can do this addition

### Designer scenarios

For types that aren't intrinsically handled during serialization into resources or code, such as in the case of the Designer with ResX and CodeDom serialization scenarios, the prescribed way of migrating away from `BinaryFormatter` is to ensure a `TypeConverter` is registered for the type or property that's participating in serialization. This way, during serialization and deserialization, the `TypeConverter` is used in lieu of where `BinaryFormatter` was once used. For more information on implementing a type converter, see [`TypeConverter` Class](/dotnet/api/system.componentmodel.typeconverter#notes-to-inheritors)

## Compatibility workaround (not recommended)

For users who cannot migrate away from `BinaryFormatter` for whatever reason, `BinaryFormatter` can be added back for compatibility. For more information, see [BinaryFormatter Migration Guide: Compatibility Package](compatibility-package.md).

> [!CAUTION]

> > BinaryFormatter is dangerous and not recommended as it puts consuming apps at risk for attacks such as denial of service, which can render the app unresponsive and or unexpectedly terminate it. For more information about the risks `BinaryFormatter` poses, see [Deserialization risks in use of BinaryFormatter and related types](../binaryformatter-security-guide.md).

Reviewer 2: I think the worst problem is that it runs untrusted code - Creates type whose name came from an unknown source, not the DoS
